In this lecture, you'll learn about backing up the IOS system image and your config file on your router
or switch.
You can back up either to an external FTP, or TFTP server, or to a USB stick, or you can back up to Flash
in the device.
The reasons you would want to do a backup, you could backup the system image to an off box TFTP server
so that if you need to recover the image later, it saves you downloading it again from the Cisco
website. It's going to be handy,
they're already on your TFTP server.
Obviously, there is no point in backing up the system image to Flash. It's there in Flash already anyway.
Reasons we would take a copy of the backup config is if we want to roll back to that later on. We could
again take a copy to an off box location, or it might be more convenient just to do it to Flash
in that case. If you do want to restore an old version of the configuration file, you can't just copy
it into the startup or running-config because if you do that, it will be merged.
It's not going to replace it,
and if we want to restore, we're going to want to do a replacement, not a merge.
So the way that you do that is you, first off, factory reset the device.
You then copy that old config into the startup-config and then reboot, and then you're back with that
old config.
Okay,
the different commands to take a copy of our system image or to take a copy of our config file,
some examples, we could do 'copy flash
tftp'. The IOS system image is in Flash, so that's the command
you would use to backup the system image.
We could do a 'copy running-config
tftp' to save a copy of our config off box on a TFTP server.
Another example is 'copy startup-config usb'. Okay, so
let's have a look at some examples in a lab environment. With the lab,
I've got a router at 10.10.10.1, and I've got a TFTP server at 10.10.10.10
First couple of things I'll do is I'll back up the system image and the running-config
to the TFTP server. So let's go on to our router first, and if I do a 'show flash' here,
you can see that the system image is
c2900-universalk9-mz is what it starts with.
I just want to show you that it's not already on the TFTP server, so I'll go into TFTP server, and you
can see there's no file already there that starts with c2900. So,
I want to have a backup of this system image onto the TFTP server. The way I do that is back on my
router,
I say 'copy flash
tftp'. It will ask me for the source file name.
I'm going to copy and paste that from the 'show flash' output.
Then the address of the remote host is my TFTP server that is at 10.10.10.0.
I want to use the same file name on the TFTP server as well, so I hit Enter, and I can see that it goes
copying the file over to the TFTP server. If I now go back onto the TFTP server again and just refresh
this, so go back to the Services and TFTP,
I can see the file is now on my TFTP server.
Okay, so that's how you take a backup copy of your system image. If you wanted to take a backup copy
in your config, I'll go back on the router again. And for this, I will do a 'copy run tftp'. It will copy
my running configuration there.
It will ask me where the remote host is again, the TFTP server is at 10.10.10.10. Then, it will ask
me what I want to call the file name.
I will call this R1-Monday because it's a Monday here today. It's a good idea to put the actual
date on there.
Obviously, a bit more specific than just Monday. Hit enter.
It's a really small file, so it takes next to no time to copy.
If I go back on the TFTP server and refresh this again, you can see there is the backup of my configuration.
Okay, so that's how you back up to a TFTP server. Next one, let's take a backup to Flash and then restore
it.
So I'll go back on the router, and I'll do a 'show flash', and you can see that I don't have any backup files
in there right now. So, I'll do a copy-
Actually, let's show you the change happening.
So I'm on hostname R1 right now, and I will take a backup of my running-config. So I'll say 'copy
run flash', and let's call this R1-Lab for the file name.
Okay,
and now I will go to global configuration, and I will change my hostname to R2.
Now, I haven't saved it to the startup-config yet.
So if I wanted to get it back to R1, I could just do a reboot. But as soon as I do a 'copy run start',
that hostname is now in both the running-config and the startup-config. So I do a 'show run', I can see my
hostname is R2, and if I do a 'show start', the hostname is R2 there as well. Let's say, I don't
like this new config, and I want to get back to the old config. Really, in the real world, where this is
useful is in a lab or a test environment. So say that you want to do some lab exercises, and then you
want to be able to easily go back to the startup-config for the start of that lab.
What you do is you set up the starting configuration and then save a copy of it to Flash, and then you
can then go on make whatever changes you want. Then to get back to the startup-config again,
what you do is you do a 'write erase' to erase the startup-config.
So when I do a 'show start', you'll see that the startup-config is gone.
Then what I'll do is 'show flash', just to check the name of my backup config, and I'm going to do a 'copy flash start'.
The source file name,
I will copy and paste. So I will paste that in, it was R1-Lab. The destination file name is going to be the
startup-config.
And now, if I do a 'reload' when it comes back up again with a little bit of luck, it's going to be with
the original configuration, and the hostname is going to be R1.
So there you go,
that works just fine.
Okay,
so that is how you backup your running or your startup-config to an off box server,
how you can also take a backup of your config to Flash, and how to restore from that if you need to later on.
See you in the next lecture.